h2. Unit Testing - Adding Unit Test Files

This guide covers unit test file generation and organization. After reading this guide, you will be able to:

* Automatically generate a unit test file that will be placed in the correct location.
* Manually create a unit test file from a template.
* Manually create unit test files.
* Arrange your unit test files.

endprologue.


h3. Creating a Directory for Your Unit Test Files

When you first create your SproutCore application, directories are automatically created for you.

<shell>
$ sc-init MyApp
 ~ Created directory at my_app
 ~ Created file at my_app/Buildfile
 ~ Created file at my_app/README
 ~ Created directory at apps
 ~ Created directory at apps/my_app
 ~ Created directory at apps/my_app/resources
 ~ Created file at apps/my_app/resources/main_page.js
 ~ Created file at apps/my_app/resources/loading.rhtml
 ~ Created file at apps/my_app/core.js
 ~ Created file at apps/my_app/main.js
Your new SproutCore project is ready!
</shell>

By convention, SproutCore assumes that all unit tests files are located in the +tests+ sub-directory for your application (or framework).

@my_app/apps/my_app/tests@

Hence, create the +tests+ directory if it is missing.

Unlike like most folders, SproutCore assumes that each file in the tests
directory that ends in '.js' or '.rhtml' is a unit test.  You can load each
of these unit tests individually or as a group from the built-in test runner.

NOTE: The files in the +tests+ directory are omitted from your production deployment.

h3. Creating a Unit Test File

SproutCore unit test cases are coded and saved into unit test files under the +tests+ directory.

It is good practice to group related unit test cases into a single unit test file. For example, all test cases for a +login+ controller class should be saved in a unit test file called +login.js+.
This is way, when a change is made to the login controller class, we can run all the unit test cases in +login.js+ to verify.

In addition, it is good practice to group related unit test files into a sub-directory under the +tests+ directory. For example, unit test files for controllers should be saved in the +tests/controller+  directory. In this way, if a change is made to all controllers, we run the unit test cases in all unit test files in the +controller+ directory to verify.

There are three ways to create your unit test files.

h4. Automatically Creating Unit Test Files

When you use the +sc-gen+ tool to add new source files to your application, it will automatically add a corresponding test file added into the +tests+ directory.  For example,

<shell>
$ sc-gen controller MyApp.LoginController
 ~ Created directory at controllers
 ~ Created file at controllers/login.js
 ~ Created directory at tests
 ~ Created directory at tests/controllers
 ~ Created file at tests/controllers/login.js // <== The generated unit test file

Your controller is now ready to use!
</shell>

Notice the creation of +tests/controllers/login.js+.

Conveniently, the generated unit test file is built from a template:

<javascript filename="apps/my_app/test/controllers/login.js">
// ==================================================
// Project:   MyApp.loginController Unit Test
// Copyright: ©2011 My Company, Inc.
// ==================================================
/*globals MyApp module test ok equals same stop start */

module("MyApp.loginController");

// TODO: Replace with real unit test for MyApp.loginController
test("test description", function() {
  var expected = "test";
  var result   = "test";
  equals(result, expected, "test should equal test");
});
</javascript>

h4. Generating Unit Test Files

You can also use the +sc-gen+ tool to create your unit test file by itself:

<shell>
$ sc-gen test TARGET_NAME PATH/TO/TEST[.js]
</shell>

For example, if you wanted to add a unit test file named +views/login/render.js+ to your application, you would:

<shell>
$ sc-gen test MyApp views/login/render
 ~ Created file at tests/views/login/render.js

Your unit test has been generated and is now ready to be configured!
</shell>

+render.js+ contains a sample unit test case to help you get started.

<javascript filename="apps/my_app/tests/views/login/render.js">
// ==================================================
// Project:   MyApp Unit Test
// Copyright: ©2011 My Company, Inc.
// ==================================================
/*globals MyApp module test ok equals same stop start */

module("MyApp");

// TODO: Replace with real unit test
test("test description", function() {
  var expected = "test";
  var result   = "test";
  equals(result, expected, "test should equal test");
});
</javascript>



h4. Manually Creating Unit Test Files

If you cannot or would prefer not to use the +sc-gen+ tool, you can always add a unit test manually.

Just create a new +.js+ file in your +tests+ directory.  It will be automatically run by the test runner when appropriate.




h3. How to Arrange Your Unit Tests

Unit tests work best if you arrange them into files and directories based on how you might want to run them together.  Often, it is a good practice is to create a directory for each class you add to your app and one unit test file per method you want to test inside that directory.

For example, the unit tests for SC.Object might look something like:

<shell>
tests/system/object/create.js
tests/system/object/extend.js
tests/system/object/kindOf.js
...
</shell>

This way you can easily run all of the unit tests for a particular method, all of the unit tests for the SC.Object class itself or all of the unit tests for classes defined in the "system" directory of the target.



h3. Moving On

Once you've added a unit test file, now you need to write some unit test code.
Learn more by writing your first unit test.

On to "Writing Unit Test Cases »":/writing_unit_tests.html

h3. Changelog

* February 15, 2011: initial version by "Scott Smith":credits.html#oldfartdeveloper and "Vibul Imtarnasan":credits.html#veebs
* March     2, 2011: added filenames, fixed link in credits, changed +<plain>+ tags to +<shell>+ tags by "Topher Fangio":credits.html#topherfangio
