h2. Connecting with a DataSource

This guide covers how to write a DataSource using the API's in SproutCore 1.0&ndash;1.5.
After reading this guide, you will be able to:

* Understand what a DataSource is, and where it fits into the SproutCore Data Stream
* Create your own DataSource and link it to your App

If you are looking for other methods of talking to the server, "look here":connect_server.html.

endprologue.

WARNING: This is a Draft Copy, and although the information in here is correct, it may be incomplete in places.

h3. What is a DataSource?

A DataSource is the layer that sits between your SproutCore application's "store":records.html#models-records-and-the-store and your backend. To start out, your app will probably be setup to use "fixtures":fixtures.html. This will populate your app with data without having to hit your server in development.  When you are ready to interact with your backend, you can create your own DataSource that will send and receive data to and from your backend.

NOTE: A DataSource is different from the Store. The Store is the in memory storage for your records, while the DataSource is the communication layer linking the store to your backend.

TODO: A diagram will be nice, showing the layers of a SproutCore application, with the datasource highlighted to show where it fits in.

h3. When should I make my own DataSource?

If you want to be able to persist the data that your users enter, over sessions, then you'll want to save it, either to a server or to local storage. The beauty of SproutCore's data layers is that you can write your app and seamlessly move from one data source to another and nothing but your DataSource will need to be changed.

h3. A look at the API

Here we will look at an example API from the server.  Creating the server side code is a "digging deeper topic".  For now you can have a look at the numerous examples in the "todo app tutorial":http://wiki.sproutcore.com/w/page/12413020/Todos%2006-Building%20the%20Backend. 


For the purpose of this guide, we are going to assume that we have a server that will provide us with a basic "RESTful API":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_State_Transfer#RESTful_web_services. If we wanted to get a list of all ToDo items, we would send a GET request to:
<plain>
GET: /todos/
</plain>
Which will return a "JSON":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Json array like:
<javascript>
[
  {
    "id": 1,
    "title": "Learn to use SproutCore",
    "done": false
  },
  {
    "id": 2,
    "title": "Something",
    "done": false
  }
]
</javascript>
To create a new ToDo item, we can POST to this URL with JSON in the body.

<plain>
POST: /todos/
{
  "title": "Profit!",
  "done": false
}
</plain>
The server will return the new ID for us.
<javascript>
{
  "id": 3
}
</javascript>

If we specify an ID in the url:
<plain>
GET: /todos/3
</plain>
You'll see just one object returned:
<javascript>
{
  "id": 3,
  "title": "Profit!",
  "done": false
}
</javascript>
The API also allows us to send a PUT to update an existing ToDo item and DELETE to remove it.

A PUT or DELETE response will not have a body, we will know that everything is ok if HTTP status is 200

With this basic understanding of how the server works, we can get started writing our DataSource.

h3. Setup

h4. Creating a DataSource

To generate a DataSource, use the command:

<shell>
sc-gen data-source MyApp.RESTDataSource
</shell>

NOTE: Anywhere you see MyApp, replace this with the name of the application that you're building.

This will make a file in +apps/my_app/data_sources/rest.js+. This file will be stubbed with the default functions that will get called by the store.

h4. Linking to the Store

The next step is linking the new DataSource to the store. By default, the store will be using "Fixtures":fixtures.html. In +core.js+ you'll see:

<javascript>
  store: SC.Store.create().from(SC.Record.fixtures)
</javascript>

Replace this with the newly created DataSource:

<javascript>
  store: SC.Store.create().from('MyApp.RESTDataSource')
</javascript>

This will tell the store to use the new DataSource when trying to find data.

NOTE: As you can see we are replacing a JavaScript Object: +SC.Record.fixtures+ with a string +'MyApp.RESTDataSource'+. This is because our DataSource won't have been initialised. The first time the store tries to access the DataSource it will convert the string to an object and save it for future reference. See "Core Concepts":core_concepts.html#property-paths for more information.

h3. Writing The DataSource

h4. Our First Fetch

The first thing that your app will likely do is to fetch a bunch of data. This is usually done via a "query":records.html#using-queries. The query for finding all ToDo's will look like:

<javascript>
  MyApp.QUERY_ALL_TODOS = SC.Query.local(MyApp.Todo)
</javascript>

NOTE: Our DataSource will be written assuming that "local queries":records.html#local-vs-remote-queries are being used. Local queries are what you will be using most of the time. Remote queries will be covered in a separate guide.

When you call +App.store.find(MyApp.QUERY_ALL_TODOS)+, the store will return a "RecordArray":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.RecordArray.html containing matching records (or an empty recordArray, if nothing matches). This RecordArray is linked to the query so that it will automatically update any time the query conditions match a new record. After it has returned, the store will call 'fetch' on its attached DataSource. 

This is when we get to take action. The generated DataSource will already contain the following code:

<javascript>
  fetch: function(store, query) {

    // TODO: Add handlers to fetch data for specific queries.  
    // call store.dataSourceDidFetchQuery(query) when done.

    return NO ; // return YES if you handled the query
  },
</javascript>

Currently, this DataSource will not do anything except return NO. This tells the store that we are not going to handle this query.

We are also given a hint of what we need to do next. When the server responds, we will call +store.dataSourceDidFetchQuery(query)+ to let the store know that this query has been updated.

Now we want to fetch all the Todo's

<javascript>
fetch: function(store, query) {
  SC.Request.getUrl('/todos/').json()
    .notify(this, 'fetchDidComplete', store, query)
    .send()

  return YES;
},

fetchDidComplete: function(response, store, query) {
  if(SC.ok(response)) {
    var recordType = query.get('recordType'),
        records = response.get('body');
    
    store.loadRecords(recordType, records);
    store.dataSourceDidFetchQuery(query);
    
  } else {
    // Tell the store that your server returned an error
    store.dataSourceDidErrorQuery(query, response);
  }
}
</javascript>

Our +Fetch+ function is pretty simple. For now, we are constructing an +Request+ to send to the server.

"SC.Request":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.Request.html is SproutCore's simple wrapper around an Ajax call.

NOTE: You are not restricted to using an SC.Request inside of a DataSource, but it is advised that you don't go making calls to your server from just anywhere in your app.

".getUrl":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.Request.html#.getUrl tells our request that we want to use the GET method to contact the given url. You can also use the following
* "putUrl":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.Request.html#.putUrl
* "postUrl":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.Request.html#.postUrl
* "deleteUrl":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.Request.html#.deleteUrl

".json":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.Request.html#json lets the request know that we are expecting the server to send back JSON, so it will automatically parse it for us. Without this, the return value would be a string. We could also have called +.xml()+ if your server talks XML.

".notify":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.Request.html#notify sets the callback method. By default SC.Requests are asynchronous, so the app can keep running while waiting for the server. The parameters used here are:
  # +this+ {Object} The target object that the action will run on
  # +'fetchDidComplete'+ {String} The name of the function that is located on `target` that will get called
  # +store, query+ {Any Objects} All following parameters will get passed into the call back

".send":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.Request.html#send will now actually send the built up request and return immediately (as we have kept the default async behaviour), without waiting for the server. 

NOTE: +.send()+ also takes a +String+ parameter for the +POST+ and +PUT+ methods to send as the body of the request.

When the server responds to the request, our callback method +fetchDidComplete+ will get called. The first parameter is the SC.Response related to the Request we just sent. Any following parameters are the ones we passed into +.notify()+: +store+ and +query+.

First thing we do when the response comes back is check to see if there was an error or not.
"SC.ok":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.html#.ok will do this for us.

If all is good, we can now load the records into the store. First we need to get the RecordType that is stored in the query so we can inform the store. For us, it will be +MyApp.Todo+.

Next, we get our records with +response.get('body')+.  This is where the JSON string is converted into JS objects for us. If we did not call +.json()+ on the +Request+, it would return a string.

This works because our server responds with an array at the top level of the JSON. If your server returned something like:
<javascript>
{
  length: 1,
  records: [
    {
      "id": 1,
      "title": "Learn to use SproutCore",
      "done": false
    }
  ]
}
</javascript>

Then we would use this instead:

<javascript>
var body = response.get('body')
    records = body.records;
</javascript>
NOTE: Note how we didn't use +.get('records')+, this is because the JSON is converted into plain JS, not +SC.Object+'s.

Now we call "loadRecords":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.Store.html#loadRecords on the store to actually put our data into the store. The first parameter is the Record Type of the objects you are going to load. The second is an array of plain JS object hashes containing your records data.

WARNING: You need to make sure that your data hashes have their "primary key":records.html#record-ids properties, in this case '+id+'.

NOTE: This is the usual way of calling +loadRecords+, but it can be called with a few different signatures. This allows for quite complex behaviour, such as loading multiple record types at once. These will be covered by other guides.

Finally, we call ".dataSourceDidFetchQuery":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.Store.html#dataSourceDidFetchQuery to let the store know that we have finished loading records, and it is now time to update the passed in query. The query that we passed in is the one that was given to us by +fetch+.  It was passed in through to the callback.

If the server returned an error, such as +404+ Not Found, or the +500+ series of server errors, then we'll let the store know with ".dataSourceDidErrorQuery":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/SC.Store.html#dataSourceDidErrorQuery. This sets the query into an error state, for which you can later check and deal with.

h4. Gaining Flexibility

This design is simple, but as you can see, not very flexible, it only allows for one url. That won't get us very far. But given that all of our records are going to have a very similar URL, it should be simple to dynamically generate this URL.

We can have each of our models know what their URL will be:

<javascript>
MyApp.Todo = SC.Record.extend(
/** @scope MyApp.Todo.prototype */ {

  // TODO: Add your own code here.

}) ;

MyApp.Todo.mixin({
  resourcePath: 'todo',
  pluralResourcePath: 'todos'
}) ;
</javascript>

We use a mixin here to set these as class properties. it allows us to get the path without an instance. For example: +MyApp.Todo.resourcePath+.

This will allow our DataSource to find the path needed. We'll change the fetch method to:

<javascript>
fetch: function(store, query) {
  SC.Request.getUrl('/%@/'.fmt(query.recordType.pluralResourcePath))
    .notify(this, 'fetchDidComplete', store, query)
    .json().send()

  return YES;
},
</javascript>

The fetch method will now use a dynamic URL for each record type.  

NOTE: The "fmt":http://docs.sproutcore20.com/symbols/String.html#String#fmt function outputs a formatted string.

h4. Change of Mind

Fetching records is fun but it will only get us so far. Eventually we are going to want to make some changes to these records.

Each time our store wants to commit changes to the server, the +updateRecord+ method will be called for each of the changed records.
<javascript>
updateRecord: function(store, storeKey) {
  var recordType = store.recordTypeFor(storeKey),
      id = store.idFor(storeKey),
      data = store.readDataHash(storeKey);
  
  SC.Request.putUrl("/%@/%@".fmt(recordType.resourcePath, id))
    .notify(this, 'updateRecordDidComplete', store, storeKey, id)
    .json().send(data);
  
  return YES;
},

updateRecordDidComplete: function(response, store, storeKey, id) {
  if(SC.ok(response) && response.get('status') === 200) {
    // Tell the store that we have successfully updated
    store.dataSourceDidComplete(storeKey);
  } else {
    // Tell the store that your server returned an error
    store.dataSourceDidError(storeKey, response);
  }
}
</javascript>

Our API uses the PUT method for making changes, so we use +putUrl()+, the string that we are making for the url, will end up looking something like: +/todo/1+

This code should look familiar with only a few differences. This time we don't have a query, but instead just a reference to a single record, via it's +storeKey+. With this, we get the +recordType+, +id+ and the +data+ (the actual properties of our record).

NOTE: In this instance we call +send()+ with an object. This is possible, because we also called +json()+. Without this, +send()+ would need to be called with a string.

Our API will return empty response with status 200 from our PUT command.

So we test for it:

<javascript>
response.get('status') === 200
</javascript>

If all is good, then we call +dataSourceDidComplete+ to tell the store we are done.

h5. Server Processing

If your server needs to process the data, it might need to send back different data than what you send up. Your server might send back something like:

<javascript>
{
  "record": {
    "id": 3,
    "title": "Profit!",
    "done": false,
    "updatedAt": "2011-02-20 11:36Z"
  }
}
</javascript>

You'll then need to update your callback to tell the store about it:

<javascript>
store.dataSourceDidComplete(storeKey, response.get('body').record);
</javascript>

This will update the properties on your record with any changes that the server makes.

h4. Going for Creation

Creating records is much like updating them, but when you first create a record in the store, it does not have an +id+. So when the server responds, with the +id+:
<javascript>
{
  "id": 3
}
</javascript>
We tell the store about it:
<javascript>
createRecord: function(store, storeKey) {
  var recordType = store.recordTypeFor(storeKey),
      data = store.readDataHash(storeKey);
  
  SC.Request.postUrl("/%@".fmt(recordType.pluralResourcePath))
    .notify(this, 'createRecordDidComplete', store, storeKey)
    .json().send(data);
  
  return YES;
},

createRecordDidComplete: function(response, store, storeKey) {
  var body = response.get('body');
  if(SC.ok(response) && response.get('status') === 200) {
    // Tell the store that we have successfully updated
    store.dataSourceDidComplete(storeKey, null, body.id);
  } else {
    // Tell the store that your server returned an error
    store.dataSourceDidError(storeKey, response);
  }
}
</javascript>

h5. Server Processing

The same deal with server side processing applies here as with updates.

h4. Feeling Destructive

Things should start feeling pretty familiar now, you can probably guess what's going to come next.

<javascript>
destroyRecord: function(store, storeKey) {
  var recordType = store.recordTypeFor(storeKey),
      id = store.idFor(storeKey);
  
  SC.Request.deleteUrl("/%@/%@".fmt(recordType.resourcePath, id))
    .notify(this, 'destroyRecordDidComplete', store, storeKey)
    .json().send();
  
  return YES;
},

destroyRecordDidComplete: function(response, store, storeKey) {
  var body = response.get('body');
  if(SC.ok(response) && response.get('status') === 200) {
    // Tell the store that we have successfully updated
    store.dataSourceDidDestroy(storeKey);
  } else {
    // Tell the store that your server returned an error
    store.dataSourceDidError(storeKey, response);
  }
}
</javascript>

You should have noticed the 2 differences,
 1) We're using +deleteUrl+
 2) We're calling +dataSourceDidDestroy+ in the callback.

h4. Ahh, Refreshing

One that that is not always used, but some apps find helpful, is being able to refresh a record, to get the latest from the server.

This is similar to a query, but for only a single record.

<javascript>
retrieveRecord: function(store, storeKey) {
  var recordType = store.recordTypeFor(storeKey),
      id = store.idFor(storeKey),
      data = store.readDataHash(storeKey);
  
  SC.Request.getUrl("/%@/%@".fmt(recordType.resourcePath, id))
    .notify(this, 'retrieveRecordDidComplete', store, storeKey, id)
    .json().send(data);
  
  return YES;
},

retrieveRecordDidComplete: function(response, store, storeKey, id) {
  if(SC.ok(response) && response.get('status') === 200) {
    // Tell the store that we have successfully updated
    store.dataSourceDidComplete(storeKey, response.get('body').record);
  } else {
    // Tell the store that your server returned an error
    store.dataSourceDidError(storeKey, response);
  }
}
</javascript>

This time, we'll always be passing the datahash into +dataSourceDidComplete+, to make sure that the local record is the same as the server copy.

h3. Things to Note

TODO: Some important things to note will go here.

h4. A Records PrimaryKey

By default, SproutCore sets the primaryKey property of records to 'guid'. A common convention of many server side APIs is to use just 'id'.
To make your records work with this, you can override the default in your Model files.
<javascript>
App.Todo = SC.Record.extend({
  primaryKey:'id'
})
</javascript>
You may set this to anything that you want, if your server uses, for example, +TID+ for your todo's id, you must set +primaryKey:'TID'+. Like normal JS properties, this is case sensitive.

h4. Prepare for a Change

The dataSource as we have it now is handy, but as people have been using it, we have discovered that there are many improvements that can be made. As a courtesy we are just letting you know that a future (yet undecided) version of SproutCore is going to have a vastly updated DataSource layer.

Don't hold back developing your awesome app now. Just know, and be excited, that there are great improvements coming.

h3. Advanced topics

h4. Managing Many Records with a Bulk API

h4. Datasource for sparseArray

h4. Cascading Datasource

h4. Fetching a Query with Multiple Data Types

h4. Datasource for Remote Query

h3. Changelog

* March 2, 2011: initial version by "Geoffrey Donaldson":credits.html#geoffreyd
* March 2, 2011: minor fixes by "Peter Wagenet":credits.html#pwagenet
* March 22, 2011: minor fixes/formatting by "Topher Fangio":credits.html#topherfangio
* April 18, 2011: corrections and fixes by "Piotr Sarnacki":credits.html#drogus
