h2. Getting Started: Part 2


In Part 1, we walked through the basic elements of a SproutCore app. In Part 2
we introduce some of the guiding concepts behind a SproutCore application
such as views, controllers, and statecharts.

In Part 2, you will:

* Learn about statecharts and how they can improve your application.
* Create a new statechart-based SproutCore application, TodosTwo.
* Learn about views and how they should handle events.
* Learn how to separate views in individual files with the use of _sc_require()_.
* Learn how to pass events to the application's statechart.

endprologue.

h3. Why Statecharts?

If you've ever built any sizable application, or even small ones for that matter, you've
probably run into a bug that was caused by some piece of logic that didn't work quite as
you intended.

Perhaps it was an if statement with an invalid test expression, or some piece of code that changed
a variable that you weren't expecting to be updated. Some bugs happen because you don't understand
how your app would react under a particular set of conditions.

Statecharts help reduce uncertainty, by defining more explicitly what can and cannot happen
within your application. You think of discrete states, such as "showing login panel." You think
of transitions between states. For example, you would think about what should happen as the login 
panel is shown, what could happen while it is showing, and what should happen when it is taken down.

h3. What is a Statechart?

A statechart is a simple nested construct that helps you better organize your code into
logical hierarchical states. Your applications will have many states,
and each state may have many substates within it. Each state can respond to a certain
set of actions, the name for events associated with a statechart.

NOTE: The term "event" is more generic than the term "action." We can speak of the event
system, generally, that includes normal web events like *mouseDown* along with actions in
the statechart. A statechart action is a type of event.

Consider a SproutCore application for mapping, with the following top-level states, substates, and actions:

# LOADING
#* _loadingFinished_
# LOADED
##* _viewTermsOfService_
##* _viewPrivacyPolicy_
### LOGGED_OUT
###* _login_
### LOGGED_IN
###* _createBasemap_
###* _zoomMapView_
###* _showPointData_
###* _other mapping actions..._

In the list above, the states are in ALL-CAPS, the actions are in italics.

INFO: The Getting Started Todos applications use ALL_CAPS for state names, for the sake of continuity.
However, states are standard SC objects and can follow any naming convention you want.  Many developers
prefer CamelCase (i.e., MyApp.LoggedInState) while others prefer namespacing their states (i.e.,
MyApp.States.LoggedIn).  Some prefer verb-style over noun-style state names. Whatever method you 
choose is fine, just be consistent, so you, and other developers, can more easily follow your code.

NOTE: A state is a state is a state. A substate is a state. (You can always use the term state; when you
use the term substate, the reference is relative to a parent state).

h4. Decoding the Statechart

In our mapping example here, the application can be in one of the two top level states: LOADING or LOADED. If 
it is in one of these states, it cannot be in the other. When it is in the LOADING state, the only available 
action is the _loadingFinished_ action. The statechart/application should not respond to any other events. 
Once control moves into the LOADED state, it can move to two additional states, substates of the LOADED 
state: LOGGED_OUT or LOGGED_IN. Again, the program can only be in one at a given time, so when the user is 
"logged out", after the application has loaded, the only available action is the _login_ action.

However, notice that the _viewTermsOfService_ action and the _viewPrivacyPolicy_ action are both available in
the LOADED state. This means that regardless of whether the program is in the LOGGED_OUT state or the LOGGED_IN
state, the user should be allowed to view the terms of service or the privacy policy.

Once the user has authenticated and logged in, they have various actions available in the mapping system.
Imagine a map user interface that appears, with buttons in a dashboard, with live clickable elements on the map, etc. 
The example actions given above, _createBasemap_, _zoomMapView_, and _showPointData_ are just a sample of what
would be many actions tied to user interface elements.

NOTE: States are used in all parts of an application, not just to user interface parts. A large behind-the-scenes
data import system in our mapping example could be programmed using statecharts.

h4. How Statecharts Help

An application only responds to certain actions at certain times. This makes it
much easier to verify that an app is working properly, by ensuring that events are handled exactly when they
need to be handled. Furthermore, if, say, a bug in the design of the user interface allows an action to happen
when it shouldn't (like allowing some action when the user is logged out), the application itself may maintain 
a consistent state and continue to operate. Programming with statecharts can help isolate parts of the system.

h3. Creating the Statechart

Create a statechart-based SproutCore app with the *sproutcore gen statechart_app* command:

<shell>
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started
$ sproutcore gen statechart_app TodosTwo
   ~ Created directory at apps/todos_two
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_two/Buildfile
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_two/core.js
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_two/main.js
   ~ Created directory at apps/todos_two/resources
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_two/resources/_theme.css
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_two/resources/loading.rhtml
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_two/resources/main_page.js
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_two/statechart.js
   ~ Created directory at apps/todos_two/states
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_two/states/ready_state.js
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_two/theme.js

  Your application target is now ready to use!
</shell>

The directory structure is:

* *getting_started/*
** *Buildfile*
** *README.md*
** *apps/*
*** *todos_one/*
**** *...*
*** *todos_two/*
**** *Buildfile*
**** *core.js*
**** *main.js*
**** *_statechart.js_*
**** *theme.js*
**** *resources/*
***** *_theme.css*
***** *loading.rhtml*
***** *main_page.js*
**** *_states/_*
***** *_ready_state.js_*

This structure looks almost identical to the standard app made with the *sproutcore gen app* command, except 
that you now see two new files, a _statechart.js_ file in the application root directory, and a new 
_states_ directory with one state file, _ready_state.js_:

* _statechart.js_, and
* _states/ready_state.js_

The _statechart.js_ file describes your statechart and the initial state that should be entered when the
statechart is first initialized. Open it, and you should see the following:

<javascript filename="apps/todos_two/statechart.js">
TodosTwo.statechart = SC.Statechart.create({

  initialState: 'readyState',

  readyState: SC.State.plugin('TodosTwo.ReadyState'),
  // someOtherState: SC.State.plugin('TodosTwo.SomeOtherState')

});
</javascript>

NOTE: This example uses CamelCase state names.

Note the use of SC.Statechart.create(), instead of SC.Statechart.extend().  Views and models generally 
use .extend() when you are defining them, because elsewhere in the system, instantiation of objects happens.
Controllers and the statechart use .create() because we need to directly create objects to work with. 

Also note the use of the SC.State.plugin() function. This allows you to put your states in separate files in a
states directory.

Open _states/ready_state.js_ and take a look:

<javascript filename="apps/todos_two/states/ready_state.js">
TodosTwo.ReadyState = SC.State.extend({ 

  enterState: function() {
    TodosTwo.getPath('mainPage.mainPane').append();
  },
 
  exitState: function() {
    TodosTwo.getPath('mainPage.mainPane').remove();
  }

});
</javascript>

States may define an _enterState()_ function to prepare for the new state, and an _exitState()_ function to 
clean up after themselves. For user interface programming, these functions are where you show and hide 
panels, as you see here, with the use of .append() to show and .remove() to hide.

The TodosTwo.ReadyState is the only state in this "Hello World" app, so it only appends the main
page's main pane. 

h3. Where Views Fit In

We've covered statecharts, so you know a little bit about how they work. Let's talk about how statecharts 
can help organize views and make your code super-clean.

The _resources/main_page.js_ file defines the main user interface of your application.

Edit the file to add a second child view, labelView2:

<javascript filename="apps/todos_two/resources/main_page.js">
TodosTwo.mainPage = SC.Page.design({
  
  mainPane: SC.MainPane.design({
    childViews: 'labelView labelView2'.w(),
    
    labelView: SC.LabelView.design({
      layout: { centerX: 0, centerY: 0, width: 200, height: 18 },
      textAlign: SC.ALIGN_CENTER,
      tagName: "h1", 
      value: "Welcome to SproutCore!"
    }),
    
    labelView2: SC.LabelView.design({
      layout: { centerX: 0, centerY: 15, width: 200, height: 18 },
      textAlign: SC.ALIGN_CENTER,
      tagName: "h1", 
      value: "Now we're rolling!"
    })
  })

});
</javascript>

INFO: Throughout the Getting Started guides we have minimized in-code comments for brevity.

Note the use of the _.design()_ method here. _.design()_ is often confused with _.extend()_. 
This confusion is caused by a SproutCore "wart." _.design()_ exists so that views will work 
with a graphical designer tool for SproutCore (like Interface Builder for Mac OS X) that has 
been in development for a long time, but remains unfinished, with development long ago stalled. 
A designer tool might be created in the future, but regardless, there is a logic you can follow, 
wherein you use _.design()_ when you are *using* a view, and _.extend()_ where you 
are *defining* it. Here we are using _.design()_, but rest assured that SC.LabelView uses 
extend where it is defined in the SproutCore codebase. 

NOTE: When you make your own views, remember to use _.extend()_ when you are making the view 
in the first place, and _.design()_ elsewhere, where you use it.

If you load up "http://localhost:4020/todos_two/":http://localhost:4020/todos_two/
in your browser, you should see both labels now; the second one right below the first.

h4. Separating Views

Before we get into using views with statecharts, let's first arrange view files for TodosTwo. 
Technically, you can put all view code in <em>main_page.js</em>, but that will get impractical 
very fast. Instead you can separate each view into it's own file. This is accomplished by
using the special _sc_require()_ functionality. Modify the mainPane of the mainPage view to
have two sc_require() statements at the top, to declare two views as dependencies, and to change
the childViews of the pane to use these views:

<javascript filename="apps/todos_two/resources/main_page.js">
sc_require('views/welcome');
sc_require('views/rolling');

TodosTwo.mainPage = SC.Page.design({

  mainPane: SC.MainPane.design({
    childViews: 'welcomeView rollingView'.w(),
    
    welcomeView: TodosTwo.WelcomeView.design(),
    rollingView: TodosTwo.RollingView.design()
  })

});
</javascript>

_sc_require()_ functionality:

# The file path used in _sc_require()_ is relative to the application's root directory.
# The reference in _sc_require()_ has the filename sans the .js extension.
# The load order for javascript files will be alphabetical, unless otherwise controlled with sc_require().  Sometimes you 
get lucky on the default file loading order, if you omit a sc_require() statement. Sometimes you don't, and 
you will get a dependency error.



Now create the views folder for our new WelcomeView and RollingView:

<shell>
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started
$ mkdir apps/todos_two/views
</shell>

Next, add the views. Make sure the files have the following content and are located in the views
directory:

<javascript filename="apps/todos_two/views/welcome.js">
TodosTwo.WelcomeView = SC.LabelView.extend({
  layout: { centerX: 0, centerY: 0, width: 200, height: 18 },
  textAlign: SC.ALIGN_CENTER,
  tagName: "h1", 
  value: "Welcome to SproutCore!"
});
</javascript>

<javascript filename="apps/todos_two/views/rolling.js">
TodosTwo.RollingView = SC.LabelView.extend({
  layout: { centerX: 0, centerY: 15, width: 200, height: 18 },
  textAlign: SC.ALIGN_CENTER,
  tagName: "h1", 
  value: "Now we're rolling!"
});
</javascript>

If you refresh the page, everything should look exactly as it did before,
but now your code is cleaner and more manageable.

h4. Handling Events and Statechart Actions

Standard events for a web application include the ubiquitous mouseDown, and many others. Here we add 
an event to watch for mouseDown in our TodosTwo.RollingView, associating it with a statechart action:

<javascript filename="apps/todos_two/views/rolling.js">
TodosTwo.RollingView = SC.LabelView.design({
  layout: { centerX: 0, centerY: 15, width: 200, height: 18 },
  textAlign: SC.ALIGN_CENTER,
  tagName: "h1", 
  value: "Now we're rolling!",
  
  mouseDown: function(evt) {
    var someParam = "Woot!";

    TodosTwo.statechart.sendAction('proveIt', someParam);
  }
});
</javascript>

We set a _proveIt_ action to happen on the mouseDown event, using the statechart.sendAction() function. We must 
handle the action in the appropriate state in the statechart.

The statechart has a property for the _current state_. When the statechart recieves an 
action event, it will first ask the current state to handle it. If the current state cannot handle 
it, the statechart will ask the current state's parent state to handle the event. Attempts 
continue in this manner, bubbling up until either an ancestor state is found that can handle 
the event, or it will log a warning for the developer.  You can see warnings, as well as other 
informational messages (such as for state transitions), by turning on tracing on the statechart.

Do that now:

<javascript filename="apps/todos_two/statechart.js">
TodosTwo.statechart = SC.Statechart.create({
    
  trace: YES,   // <-- Add this line
    
  initialState: 'readyState',
    
  readyState: SC.State.plugin('TodosTwo.ReadyState')
  
});
</javascript>

Let's make our TodosTwo.ReadyState handle the _proveIt_ action that was defined on
the mouseDown event in TodosTwo.RollingView above:

<javascript filename="apps/todos_two/states/ready_state.js">
TodosTwo.ReadyState = SC.State.extend({
  
  enterState: function() {
    TodosTwo.getPath('mainPage.mainPane').append();
  },
    
  exitState: function() {
    TodosTwo.getPath('mainPage.mainPane').remove();
  },
  
  // Prove that we are rolling!
  proveIt: function(someParam) {
    alert(someParam);
  }

});
</javascript>

proveIt() is a function. It is an action in the ReadyState state.

Save your files and refresh the page. When you click on the "Now we're rolling!"
label, you should see an alert. If you look at the console output, you can also
see the tracing reports, with the event being handled by the statechart, as well 
as the initialization and the transition to the readyState.

h3. Moving Forward

You are now ready to move on to creating a full-scale SproutCore app!

"Part 3":/getting_started_3.html will introduce you to a more complete Todos application,
called TodosThree, and walk you through the process of building it from scratch. 
You will learn about models, controllers and how they tie in with the statechart 
and views.

So go grab a hot cup of joe, or something else to steel your resolve (Joking. You
think?), and dive in to "Getting Started: Part 3":/getting_started_3.html.

h3. Changelog

* May 5, 2011: initial version by "Piotr Sarnacki":credits.html#drogus
* May 9, 2011: Stylistic edits by "Tom Dale":credits.html#tomdale
* February 29, 2012: rewrite for SproutCore 1.8 by the 1.8 release sprint team, including the following who did much work on this task: "Tim Evans":credits.html#tce, "Topher Fangio":credits.html#topherfangio, "Jeff Pittman":credits.html#geojeff

