h2. Getting Started - Welcome to SproutCore

Welcome to SproutCore! This guide is deigned to get you up-and-running as quickly as possible with SproutCore. Today you will:

* Install SproutCore on your machine.
* Use the SproutCore tools to generate a basic starting application.
* Run the SproutCore development server to test your application.
* Modify the application to ensure that changes are visible.

endprologue.

h3. Introduction

This guide is designed to be as simple as possible. It will ensure that you
have the latest version of Sproutcore installed and configured properly. If you
run into any issues or bumps along the way, please reach out on the
"mailing list":http://groups.google.com/group/sproutcore or find us on IRC at
#sproutcore!

h3. Installation

There are two basic ways to install SproutCore.

* The Package Installers
* Using RubyGems

The installation method you choose should be based upon your current platform and your experience with Ruby.
The installers are currently only available for Windows and Mac. Linux and other platforms should use the
RubyGems method. Additionally, if your machine is already setup for development in Ruby, you may find it more
convenient to forgo the package installers, and just use RubyGems so that you can always get the latest
version by typing the following:

<shell>
gem update sproutcore
</shell>

So, before you move on, please visit the "Installation Page":http://sproutcore.com/install/ and either
download the appropriate package, or follow the guide for your platform.

Great! Now that SproutCore is installed, we can move forward and get our first app up-and-running!

h3. Creating A New SproutCore Application

When you are first learning any new language or framework, it is generally a good idea to create a separate
directory to store all of your code. So, in some area of your hard drive where you develop software, make a
sproutcore directory.

<shell>
$ mkdir -p ~/development/sproutcore
</shell>

NOTE: The dollar sign ($) in the code above and below represents the command line prompt and should not
be typed when executing the commands. Lines without a prompt generally show you the output of the previous
command.

This directory can serve as a place for all things SproutCore. Change directory to ~/development/sproutcore, then
create a SproutCore project:

<shell>
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore
$ sc-gen project getting_started

   ~ Created directory at getting_started
   ~ Created file at getting_started/Buildfile
   ~ Created file at getting_started/README

   Your project is now ready to use!

$ cd getting_started
</shell>

Now you have a getting_started project directory, ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started. We will build
several SproutCore apps in this project space, but for now, we'll just create a basic "Hello World" application
to ensure that everything is installed and working properly.

So, go ahead and create the app, first changing directory to the new getting_started project directory:

<shell>
$ cd getting_started
$ sc-gen app TodosOne
   ~ Created directory at apps
   ~ Created directory at apps/todos_one
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/Buildfile
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/core.js
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/main.js
   ~ Created directory at apps/todos_one/resources
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/resources/_theme.css
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/resources/loading.rhtml
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/resources/main_page.js
   ~ Created file at apps/todos_one/theme.js

  Your application target is now ready to use!
</shell>

Your directory structure should now look like the following:

* *getting_started/*
** *Buildfile*
** *README.md*
** *apps/*
*** *todos_one/*
**** *Buildfile*
**** *core.js*
**** *main.js*
**** *theme.js*
**** *resources/*
***** *_theme.css*
***** *loading.rhtml*
***** *main_page.js*

h3. Explanation

When you are building a web application in SproutCore, it is common to have
a multitude of mini-applications in order to separate out the logic into
manageable parts. For instance, Apple's iCloud application has mini-apps for
e-mail, contacts and finding your friends.

This is why there is an *apps/* directory inside of the getting_started project directory. It
allows you to easily separate distinct applications.

Inside of the *apps/todos_one* directory, you will find the Buildfile for the TodosOne application.
Just like the project (getting_started) has a *Buildfile*, each application or
framework that you create should also have a *Buildfile* which specifies it's
requirements as well as any build-options that you may want to change, such as
whether or not to minify and compact the code.

The *core.js* file is the first file that gets loaded, and is where the actual
application is defined. This is also where you usually define any global
constants that the application might use (which should be very few), or any
configuration that external libraries might require.

The *main.js* file is usually very basic. It just starts the application. If you
are using the Statechart framework (which we will discuss in Part 2), *main.js*
would simply initialize the statechart. If you open up *main.js* right now,
you'll see that it simply appends the main view to the screen.

The resources folder contains things like images, stylesheets and views.

Inside the resources folder, the *_theme.css* file defines that directory's
CSS theme. This allows you to define different themes for each directory. You
can learn more about this in the theming guide (TODO link to theming guide).

The *resources/loading.rhtml* file defines the HTML that your users see before
SproutCore has fully loaded and handed control over to the application. For
now, it just displays a simple loading message.

Lastly, the *resources/main_page.js* file describes the actual user interface of the
application. Open this file now and take a look. Depending upon how complex
the app becomes, you may decide to have just the mainPage and mainPane, or
you may decide you want to break it out a bit more by having a loadingPane,
loggedInPane, loggedOutPane, etc. Most applications have at least a few
panes, and possibly a few pages.

h3. Viewing Your Application

So, we have our SproutCore TodosOne application built, and we understand the basic
layout of the files. Let's see what it looks like in the browser!

Inside the project directory type the following command:

<shell>
$ sc-server
</shell>

NOTE: If you are attempting to run multiple copies of sc-server at the same
time, you will probably see an error about the port already being in use. If
so, just re-run the command and add --port 4030 so it will not use the default
port 4020.

Load up your favorite web browser, and point it to
"http://localhost:4020/todos_one":http://localhost:4020/todos_one. If all goes
well, you should see "Welcome to Sproutcore!" in the middle of the screen.

h3. Troubleshooting

As with any unfamiliar framework, you may hit a few snags on the way. Below
we list some of the common pitfalls that other users have discovered and
solutions for getting past them.

* _"RuntimeError at /todos_one
html_builder could not find a layout file for sproutcore:lib/index.rhtml"_ -
This error usually means that sc-server could not find SproutCore where it
thought it should exist. Make sure that you've properly installed the latest
version of SproutCore; and if you are using RubyGems, try closing and
re-opening the terminal to ensure that paths are properly set.

* _"Browser says 'No matching target'"_ - This is generally caused if you
misspelled the name of the application in the URL. Make sure that you properly
typed it, and that you used underscores instead of spaces. For example:
'http://localhost/todos_one'.

* _"ERROR: missing } after property list ..."_ - This error is usually thrown
if you added a property somewhere, but forgot to put a comma at the end.
Look at the line in the error, and then look above it to see if there is
a comma missing.

h3. Changelog

* March 1, 2011: initial version by "Tom Dale":credits.html#tomdale and "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats
* March 2, 2011: fixed formmating and added paths to filenames by "Topher Fangio":credits.html#topherfangio and "Peter Wagenet":credits.html#pwagenet
* March 22, 2011: cleaned up demo based on new features by "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats
* April 11, 2011: consistently use view classes and extend, update to reflect better Handlebars integration by "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats and "Tom Dale":credits.html#tomdale
* May 6, 2011: clarifications, minor inconsistency fixes, updated CSS for older browsers, plus new mobile section by "Tyler Keating":credits.html#publickeating
* May 9, 2011: update for recent changes in SproutCore 1.6 by "Tom Dale":credits.html#tomdale and "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats
* February 27, 2012: rewrite for SproutCore 1.8 by the 1.8 release sprint team, including the following who worked on this task: "Tim Evans":credits.html#tce, "Tyler Keating":credits.html#publickeating, "Maurits Lamers":credits.html#mauritslamers, "Jeff Pittman":credits.html#geojeff, "Topher Fangio":credits.html#topherfangio

