h2. Getting Started: Part 3

In this guide, you will create a more full-fledged "to-dos" application. You will:

* Generate a new statechart-based application called TodosThree.
* Edit files created by the generation boilerplate system.
* Add a models directory, containing the Todo model definition.
* Add a controllers directory, containing two controllers.
* Add a fixtures directory, containing a file with JSON-formatted sample data.
* Celebrate powerful SproutCore programming constructs, learned along the way.

endprologue.

h3. Following Along

You have learned in previous guides how to use *sproutcore gen* to make a project directory and to create apps
in the project apps directory. You have learned how to run *sproutcore server* in the project directory, and
how to view apps in a local browser at localhost:4020/. You have learned about SproutCore app concepts,
including the use of a buildfile and of views and a statechart. We will build on that foundation to produce a
TodosThree app with components of a best-practices SproutCore app.

You would benefit from carefully following the instructions in this guide to create directories, to type in
code (or to copy and paste it), because it will register in your mind solidly. The presentation is written as
if you would add the app in this manual fashion, although you surely might prefer instead the following
options to get the finished source code:

* clone with 'git clone git@github.com/sproutcore/getting-started.git getting_started' from "Github":https://github.com/sproutcore/getting-started into your work area.

To see TodosThree in action, click "here":http://sproutcore.com/getting-started/TodosThree.

INFO: Reminder: These "Getting Started" guides attempt to strike a matter-of-fact tone that doesn't sugar-coat
complexity too much, but tries not to overwhelm. We are ramping up to inherently more challening concepts, however. 
If you need help, please ask questions in IRC or on the mailing list, with references to the numeric heading 
for relevant sections of this guide page.

h3. Creating A TodosThree Application

Here is a screen capture of the completed application: [TODO] need TodosThree screen capture image here.

The TodosThree app looks simple. It has toolbars at the top and bottom. It has a text field near the top,
where a user types in a new todo. It has a list of already added todos. Even such a simple-looking app like
this involves the use of intelligent SproutCore programming.

We can describe these intelligent aspects, generally, as the "system of connections" or, in the manner an
electrician would use, as the "wiring diagram." SproutCore apps have _bindings_ between various components of
the user interface and those of underlying machinery, the normal complement of events in a web app, and
_actions_ coordinated with _states_. 

You see the components of the user interface in the screen capture: checkboxes, buttons, text fields, list
views, etc. We'll be looking at the underlying machinery.

This will be the directory structure for the TodosThree app:

* *getting_started/* - The project directory, for holding several apps.
** *Buildfile*
** *README.md*
** *apps/*
*** *todos_three/*
**** *Buildfile*
**** *core.js*
**** *main.js*
**** *theme.js*
**** *statechart.js*
**** *states/*
***** *starting.js*
***** *logging_in.js*
***** *loading_data.js*
***** *showing_app.js*
**** *resources/*
***** *loading.rhtml*
***** *main_page.js*
***** *todo_item.js*
***** *_theme.css*
***** *styles.css*
**** *controllers/*
***** *todos.js*
***** *completed_todos.js*
**** *models/*
***** *todo.js*
**** *fixtures/*
***** *todo.js*

Here is that directory structure again, with descriptions for each item:

* *getting_started/*
** *Buildfile*                         | _Configuration for the project_ 
** *README.md*                         | _Describes your app and how to use it_
** *apps/*
*** *todos_three/*
**** *Buildfile*                       | _Configuration for the TodosThree app_
**** *core.js*                         | _TodosThree app creation code_
**** *main.js*                         | _Adds a data store, and calls the TodosThree.mainPage view_
**** *theme.js*                        | _Adds a TodosThree.Theme based on the SproutCore Ace theme_
**** *statechart.js*                   | _Contains main app states and substates_
**** *states/*
***** *ready.js*                       | _A single state, the READY state, which plugs in to the app's statechart_
***** *logging_in.js*                  | _The LOGGING_IN state (not used in TodosThree, but there for illustration)_
***** *showing_app.js*                 | _The SHOWING_APP state, the general state for responding to user actions_
***** *showing_destroy_confirmation.js*| _The SHOWING_DESTROY_CONFIRMATION state_
**** *resources/*
***** *loading.rhtml*                  | _A short html file to show when the app is loading_
***** *main_page.js*                   | _The TodosThree.mainPage view_
***** *todo_item.js*                   | _TodoItem code for a checkbox and a title_
***** *_theme.css*                     | _Contains per directory theme setup_
***** *styles.css*                     | _Defines css for theme styling_ 
**** *controllers/*
***** *todos.js*                       | _TodosThree.todosController, an SC.ArrayController to hold todo items_
***** *completed_todos.js*             | _TodosThree.completedTodosController, another SC.ArrayController_
**** *models/*
***** *todo.js*                        | _TodosThree.Todo, the definition of the Todo SC.Record type for the app_
**** *fixtures/* 
***** *todo.js*                        | _Fixtures data (for testing the app without hooking to a database)_

NOTE: SproutCore is a powerful system, challenging to master, but not so difficult to learn, provided that we
take it one step at a time.

We can use the *sproutcore gen* command again, to create part of the directory structure shown above for our
TodosThree app (You should be in the ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started project directory):

<shell>
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started

  sproutcore gen statechart_app TodosThree

 ~ Created directory at apps
 ~ Created directory at apps/todos_three
 ~ Created file at apps/todos_three/Buildfile
 ~ Created file at apps/todos_three/core.js
 ~ Created file at apps/todos_three/main.js
 ~ Created directory at apps/todos_three/resources
 ~ Created file at apps/todos_three/resources/_theme.css
 ~ Created file at apps/todos_three/resources/loading.rhtml
 ~ Created file at apps/todos_three/resources/main_page.js
 ~ Created file at apps/todos_three/statechart.js
 ~ Created directory at apps/todos_three/states
 ~ Created file at apps/todos_three/states/ready_state.js
 ~ Created file at apps/todos_three/theme.js

Your application target is now ready to use!

</shell>

NOTE: *git*: git add apps/todos_three & git commit -a -m 'Added todos_three app with _sproutcore gen statechart_app TodosThree_ command.'

INFO: Where you see such GIT notes in this guide, you can ignore them. If you know what they mean, you may use these
cues to commit to your own repo as you go. They are really for internal use in generating the associated repo.

We will work through the app, directory by directory, file by file, to edit those files and to add other
needed directories and files. 

h4. The App Root Directory

There are four .js files in the TodosThree app root directory
(~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/):

|_. theme.js |_. core.js |_. main.js |_. statechart.js |

Edit these files to assure their content matches that given in the following sections:

h5. theme.js (app root directory)

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/theme.js">
TodosThree.Theme = SC.AceTheme.create({
  name: 'todos-three'
});

SC.Theme.addTheme(TodosThree.Theme);

SC.defaultTheme = 'todos-three';
</javascript>

TodosThree.Theme is a derivative of SC.AceTheme, a very nice professional theme. You can override parts of the
Ace theme as you wish, or switch it out entirely. In theme.js, TodosThree.Theme is registered with the system,
and a default 'todos-three' namespace is created.

h5. core.js (app root directory)

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/core.js">
TodosThree = SC.Application.create(
  /** @scope TodosThree.prototype */ {
 
  NAMESPACE: 'TodosThree',
  VERSION: '0.1.0',
 
  store: SC.Store.create().from(SC.FixturesDataSource.create({
    simulateRemoteResponse: YES,
    latency: 250
  }))
});
</javascript>

The code in core.js sets up TodosThree as an instance of SC.Application.

The TodosThree namespace is TodosThree: TodosThree.mainPage, TodosThree.todosController, etc.

A data store is created from SC.Record.fixtures, which is a way to simulate a real database. This is done by
reading JSON-formatted sample data given from a fixtures javascript file, which we'll add in a later step. The
SC.FixturesDataSource.create() call will set a latency of 250ms, otherwise it will load too fast for our app
to have time to operate as it would in a normal web app situation.

h5. main.js (app root directory)

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/main.js">
TodosThree.main = function main() {
  TodosThree.statechart.initStatechart();
};
 
function main() { TodosThree.main(); }
</javascript>

The main.js file for TodosThree is very simple; we just initialize our application's statechart and let it
handle the complexity.

h5. statechart.js (app root directory)

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/statechart.js">
TodosThree.statechart = SC.Statechart.create({

  trace: YES,
 
  rootState: SC.State.design({
    initialSubstate: "READY",
 
    READY: SC.State.plugin('TodosThree.READY'),
      
    LOGGING_IN: SC.State.plugin('TodosThree.LOGGING_IN'),

    SHOWING_APP: SC.State.plugin('TodosThree.SHOWING_APP'),

    SHOWING_DESTROY_CONFIRMATION: SC.State.plugin('TodosThree.SHOWING_DESTROY_CONFIRMATION')
  })

});
</javascript>

NOTE: *GIT*: git commit -a -m 'Edited files in the root app directory.'

The statechart is a defining characteristic of a SproutCore app. Discrete states in a statechart and the
transitions between them allow a clean and simple design. In the TodosThree app statechart, the initial state
is READY.

There are four states in the TodosThree statechart: READY, LOGGING_IN, SHOWING_APP, and
SHOWING_DESTROY_CONFIRMATION. These are defined in individual files in the states directory.

h4. The States Directory

Code for individual states is held in the states directory. Change to that directory:

<shell>
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/states
</shell> 

*sproutcore gen* created a file called ready_state.js in the states directory. We are going to use it for the
TodosThree app, but to make it match our file naming pattern, rename it to ready.js:

<shell>
$ mv ready_state.js ready.js
</shell> 

Files to edit or add in the apps/todos_three/states directory are:

|_. ready.js |_. logging_in.js |_. showing_app.js |_. showing_destroy_confirmation.js |

h5. READY State (replace content of renamed ready.js)

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/states/ready.js">
TodosThree.READY = SC.State.design({
  enterState: function() {
    if (SC.instanceOf(TodosThree.store.dataSource, SC.FixturesDataSource)) {
      TodosThree.todosController.set('content',
        TodosThree.store.find(SC.Query.local(TodosThree.Todo, { orderBy: 'timestamp DESC' })));
      TodosThree.completedTodosController.set('content',
        TodosThree.store.find(SC.Query.local(TodosThree.Todo, 'isCompleted = true')));
    } else {
      this.gotoState('LOGGING_IN');
    }
  },
 
  didLoad: function () {
    if (TodosThree.todosController.get('status') === SC.Record.READY_CLEAN) {
      this.gotoState('SHOWING_APP');
    }
  }.stateObserves('TodosThree.todosController.status'),

  exitState: function() {
    // Nothing to worry about here.
  }
});
</javascript>

NOTE: You have seen different conventions for naming states. The style used here makes the state names
prominent.

When the statechart is initialized in the TodosThree.main() function, program control will go to the READY
state, specifically to its enterState() function, where there is a check for the type of dataSource set on the
store. Because it is an instance of FixturesDataSource, there is initialization of the controllers, instead
of going directly to the LOGGING_IN state, which we won't use in the TodosThree app. In a larger app, the
data loading would probably come at some point after logging in, in a state dedicated to the task.

We see our first observer function in didLoad(). This function is fired when the trigger given in the chained
call happens: .stateObserves('TodosThree.todosController*content.status'). In human language, this means:

"When the status of the content changes, fire this function."

When the didLoad function is fired, there is an explicit check to see that the status change was to become
SC.READY_CLEAN, and if so, to move control to the SHOWING_APP state.

This is a common pattern in SproutCore apps: Use bindings whenever you can to solve most problems, but 
there are also cases to use an observer function to wait for some task to complete before firing. Try not to
abuse observers, however, because in certain situations, there are performance penalties. This is especially
true where you do not follow best practices for wiring things together, and there is inefficient, or even
unneeded updating.

Here we are creating an observer in a state, so we use the dedicated .stateObserves() observer style,
but in general use, the observer function, used in exactly the same way, is simply called .observes(). 
There are nuances to learn about specifying paths in observer declarations, such as how to use an asterisk 
for one of the internal dots in a path. For example, for .observes(a*b.c), the meaning would be "if a.b changes, 
notify that a.b.c changed and update bindings." If it were .observes(a.b.c), instead, the meaning would be "if b 
changes, then your binding won't be updated when c changes."

h6. *Initialization of the Controllers*

Data content of the two array controllers is set in enterState() by issuing data query find calls to the store. 
SC.Query.local() is used because we know we don't have to find the data remotely in the TodosThree app. We 
search for todos, referencing the TodosThree.Todo model (an SC.Record instance). For the primary controller, 
todosController, we search for all the todos, ordering them by their timestamp property. For the 
completedTodosController, we search for all the todos for which isCompleted is true.

These aren't one-time "searches." They are associations set between the 'content' property of a
controller and a store.find() query. This is a very powerful construct, explaining how SproutCore apps get
part of their "automatic" and "always up-to-date" aspect.

NOTE: *GIT*: git commit -a -m 'Renamed ready_state.js file to ready.js. Edited to add controller content setting code.'

h5. LOGGING_IN State

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/states/logging_in.js">
TodosThree.LOGGING_IN = SC.State.design({             
  initialSubstate: "SHOWING_LOGIN",
 
  SHOWING_LOGIN: SC.State.design({
 
    enterState: function() {
    },
 
    exitState: function() {
    },
 
    authenticate: function() {
    }
  })
});
</javascript>

INFO: We won't use the LOGGING_IN state in TodosThree, but have it here for illustration.

h5. SHOWING_APP State

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/states/showing_app.js">
TodosThree.SHOWING_APP = SC.State.design({
  enterState: function() {
    TodosThree.mainPage.get('mainPane').append();
    TodosThree.mainPage.get('field').becomeFirstResponder();
  },

  exitState: function() {
  },

  addTodo: function (view) {
    var todo = (view.get('value') || '').trim();
    if (todo !== '') {
      TodosThree.store.createRecord(TodosThree.Todo, {
        title: todo,
        timestamp: SC.DateTime.create()
      });
      view.set('value', '');
    }
  },

  clearCompletedTodos: function() {
    this.gotoState('SHOWING_DESTROY_CONFIRMATION', this);
  }
});
</javascript>

In the SHOWING_APP/enterState() function, we want a blinking cursor in the new todo text field. This is
accomplished by setting this field to become first responder in the events system.

This state handles two actions, addTodo and clearCompletedTodos. There are references to view code (view.)
that will become clear after we add the resources directory, with the mainPage view and associated files, and
other view and system components.

h5. SHOWING_DESTROY_CONFIRMATION State

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/states/showing_destroy_confirmation.js">
TodosThree.SHOWING_DESTROY_CONFIRMATION = SC.State.design({
  _panel: null,

  todosBinding: 'TodosThree.completedTodosController.content',

  enterState: function() {
    var todos = this.get('todos');
    var displayDescription = "Are you sure that you wish to clear the following tasks?<br /><br />";

    displayDescription += "<ul>";
    displayDescription += todos.map(function(t) { return "<li>%@</li>".fmt(t.get('title')) }).join('\n');
    displayDescription += "</ul>";

    this._panel = SC.AlertPane.warn({
      layout: { centerX: 0, top: 80, width: 380, bottom: 80 },

      defaultResponder: TodosThree.statechart,

      message: "Clear Completed Todos",
      displayDescription: displayDescription,

      buttons: [
        { title: 'Clear', action: 'confirm', default: NO },
        { title: 'Cancel', action: 'cancel', default: YES }
      ]
    });
  },
 
  exitState: function() {
    // No need to do anything here, the SC.AlertPane will remove itself.
  },

  confirm: function() {
    TodosThree.completedTodosController.invoke('destroy');
    this.gotoState('SHOWING_APP');
  },

  cancel: function() {
    this.gotoState('SHOWING_APP');
  }
});
</javascript>

When we enter the SHOWING_DESTROY_CONFIRMATION state, we grab the current list of completed todos, format them
nicely, and then create a warning pane to make sure that the user actually wants to delete their todos. If so,
we tell the completedTodosController to destroy, or remove, the current completed todos. Then, we go back to
the SHOWING_APP state so that we can enter more todos.

NOTE: *GIT*: git commit -a -m 'Added additional states.'

h4. The Resources Directory

We've covered the highest-level parts of the app defined in the statechart. Let's add the rest. 

The mainPage view, CSS file, a theme file, and an html page live in a directory called resources.  Go to that
directory:

<shell>
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/resources
</shell> 

Files to add in the apps/todos_three/resources directory are:

|_. main_page.js |_. todo_item.js |_. _theme.css |_. styles.css |_. loading.rhtml |

h5. main_page.js (resources directory)

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/resources/main_page.js">
sc_require('todo_item');

TodosThree.mainPage = SC.Page.design({
  field: SC.outlet('mainPane.newTodoField.field'),

  mainPane: SC.MainPane.design({
    childViews: ['header', 'newTodoField', 'todosList', 'footer'],
    defaultResponder: "TodosThree.statechart", 

    header: SC.ToolbarView.design({
      layout: { centerX: 0, width: 500, top: 0, height: 36 },

      childViews: ['title', 'completeAll'],

      completeAll: SC.CheckboxView.design(SC.AutoResize, {
        autoResizePadding: { width: 47 },
        title: 'Mark all as done',
        valueBinding: 'TodosThree.completedTodosController.areAllCompleted'
      }),

      title: SC.LabelView.design({
        layout: { left: 0, right: 0, top: 0, bottom: 0 },

        totalTodosBinding: SC.Binding.oneWay('TodosThree.todosController.length'),
        completedTodosBinding: SC.Binding.oneWay('TodosThree.completedTodosController.length'),

        value: function () {
          return 'TodosThree (' + (this.get('totalTodos') - this.get('completedTodos')) + ')';
        }.property('totalTodos', 'completedTodos').cacheable()
      })
    }),

    newTodoField: SC.View.design({
      classNames: ['new-todo'],
      layout: { centerX: 0, width: 500, top: 36, height: 36 },
      childViews: ['field', 'button'],

      field: SC.TextFieldView.design({
        hint: 'What needs to be done?'
      }),

      button: SC.ButtonView.design(SC.AutoResize, {
        controlSize: SC.HUGE_CONTROL_SIZE,
        layout: { centerY: 0, height: 30, right: 12, zIndex: 100 },
        title: 'Add',
        action: 'addTodo',
        valueBinding: '.page.field.value',
        isDefaultBinding: '.page.field.focused'
      })
    }),
    
    todosList: SC.ScrollView.design({
      layout: { centerX: 0, width: 500, top: 72, bottom: 36 },
      contentView: SC.ListView.design({
        contentBinding: SC.Binding.oneWay('TodosThree.todosController'),
        rowHeight: 36,
        exampleView: SC.CheckboxView.design({
          classNames: ['todo-item'],
          valueBinding: '.content.isCompleted',
          titleBinding: SC.Binding.oneWay('.content.title')
        })
      })
    }),
        
    footer: SC.ToolbarView.design({
      layout: { centerX: 0, width: 500, bottom: 0, height: 36 },

      childViews: ['clearCompletedTodos'],
      clearCompletedTodos: SC.ButtonView.design(SC.AutoResize, {
        controlSize: SC.HUGE_CONTROL_SIZE,
        layout: { centerY: 0, height: 30, right: 12, zIndex: 100 },
        isEnabledBinding: SC.Binding.oneWay('TodosThree.completedTodosController.length').bool(),
        title: 'Clear completed todos',
        action: 'clearCompletedTodos'
      })
    })
  })

});
</javascript>

There are four parts to the TodosThree mainPage view: a header and footer, and between them are a newTodoField
and a todosList. A user types a new todo in the newTodoField, and when they click the button, labeled
'Add', the new todo is added by means of the todosController's addTodo action. The new todo will show up in
the todosList. How does this happen? Look at the lines that have Binding in the property names. When you write
user interface element code, you "wire up" these connections with such binding instructions. 

h6. *Toolbars in header and footer*

The header view is an SC.ToolbarView with two child views: a completeAll checkbox view and a title label view.
The valueBinding property of the checkbox is tied to an areAllCompleted() function in the
completedTodosController, which answers that question -- if yes, then the completeAll checkbox will show as
checked. This is a two-way binding, so it works in reverse. If the user clicks the completeAll checkbox, then
areAllCompleted() will set isCompleted to true for all todos. That makes areAllCompleted() a very special type
of function, called a computed property.

As an introduction to computed properties, we start with a basic one in the title view, an SC.LabelView. You
see two local properties as totalTodosBinding and completedTodosBinding. The computed property is the value, 
declared with a normal no-argument function signature, with .property('totalTodo', 'completedTodos').cacheable()
chained onto the end. The chained part means:

"Base this computed property on the totalTodos and completedTodos properties, and update it if either of them changes,
and, also, cache the value so unnecessary updates are avoided." 

Note that the special way of setting a binding, as with totalTodosBinding, results in the creation of a property 
that is referred to as just totalTodos. You see this in the two this.get() calls where the completedTodos are 
subtracted from the totalTodos.  

NOTE: Computed properties, so important in SproutCore, are given a fuller description below, and in other guides pages.

The footer view has a single child view, clearCompletedTodos, which is a button whose action is the
clearCompletedTodos action in the SHOWING_APP state. The isEnabledBinding property has a one-way binding
(faster, if you don't need two-way, reciprocal updating) to the length of the completedTodosController array.
If its length is 0, then isEnabled is false and the button will not be active -- if there aren't any todos,
there is nothing to clear.

h6. *newTodoField*

The newTodoField view contains a text field called field and a button. The button has two
properties that are bound to the associated text field. The valueBinding property is bound to field.value,
which is the text the user enters. Note the use of .page in the valueBinding definition. In this
context, page refers to the page itself, a helpful global available. Note at the top of the file there is a
declaration of an outlet called field, so we have a handy reference to the business end of this whole view,
.page.field, which is the newTodoField view's field. References can be cumbersome. Outlets help. 

The isDefaultBinding property also involves an interesting path. The reference to the focused boolean will
make the field become inactive if focus goes elsewhere.

NOTE: Property path syntax -- e.g., the leading . in .page.field.focused -- is something you have to look
up repeatedly until you are comfortable. In the case of the . here, it means that the path is relative to
here, this scope. 
 
h6. *todosList*

The todosList view follows the SproutCore idiom for wrapping an SC.ListView inside an SC.ScrollView. The
contentBinding property of the list is set to TodosThree.todosController. 

h5. todo_item.js (resources directory)

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/resources/todo_item.js">
TodosThree.TodoItemView = SC.CheckboxView.design({
  classNames: ['todo-item'],
  valueBinding: '.content.isCompleted',
  titleBinding: SC.Binding.oneWay('.content.title')
});
</javascript>

TodoItemView is a checkbox, which has a label. You see a bit of wiring to CSS in the classNames property, an
array of CSS class names that are to be applied to this view. valueBinding has a reference to
.content.isCompleted. What is the context for this reference? We know that this view is defined as the
exampleView property of the todos list. The term example here means "the view to use for each list item." List
items for the todos list are todos, which are defined in the TodosThree.Todo model. So, .content used in the
TodoItemView definition refers to a single todo item in the list. .content.isCompleted refers to this property
of a todo item. Likewise, titleBinding is bound to the title property of a list todo item.

You have to think about where this view is used to understand it, but that comes with the territory of having
individual views declared in separate files for convenience.

NOTE: It helps to name such views as SomethingItemView, because the Item part indicates the use in a list. 

h5. _theme.css (resources directory)

<css filename="apps/todos_three/resources/_theme.css">
/*
  This defines the global $theme variable for use inside your CSS.
  The $theme variable holds the CSS class names for your theme.
  
  You can then theme your app by using CSS like this:

      $theme.button {
        color: blue;
        @include slices('white-button.png', $left: 3, $right: 3);
      }
  
  Any _theme.css file is prepended to all files inside its directory,
  and any subdirectories that don't define their own _theme.css file.
  
  This allows you to give different directories different values for
  $theme if you wish.
*/
$theme: '.ace.todos-three';
</css>

The underscore starting the name of _theme.css is a dead giveaway that it must apply in some special way to
the theming system. It defines $theme to be our Ace-derived theme, ace.todos-three, a reference used in CSS code.

NOTE: A _theme.css file is a per directory (and subdirectories) reference definition, allowing hierarchical
control for using different themes.

h5. Content CSS file

You can add a single CSS file in your resources directory, or you can add many small ones. For the TodosThree
app, we'll choose the single file approach. In this CSS file, where you see something like
$theme.sc-text-field-view, the sc- prefix indicates an override of the sc- CSS definitions in the Ace theme.
Inspect your browser's elements listing, and you will see these references. In practice, you often need to
dive into such an elements listing, and the fancy mouse-driven browser inspection tools, to diagnose CSS
problems, such as the case of having bad math that results in one view obscuring another.

NOTE: CSS is an art unto itself, an important side of doing SproutCore development and building views.

h6. *styles.css (resources directory)*

<css filename="apps/todos_three/resources/styles.css">
$theme: '.ace.todos-three';

body { 
  -webkit-font-smoothing: antialiased;
  text-rendering: optimizelegibility;
}

/* Fix for Chrome bug on accelerated panes */
.sc-pane { 
  -webkit-transform: none;
}

$theme.sc-text-field-view { 
  font-size: 14px;
  .hint {
    font-size: 14px;
    line-height: 30px;
  }
 
  .padding { 
    left: 14px;
  }
}

$theme.toolbar {
  .checkbox {
    .button {
      left: 13px;
      top: 50%;
      margin-top: -8px;
    }
 
    .label {
      left: 47px;
      line-height: 36px;
    }
  }
 
  .sc-label-view {
    text-align: right;
    line-height: 36px;
    font-weight: bold;
    font-size: 18px;
    padding-right: 12px;
  }
}

$theme.todo-item {
  .button {
    left: 13px;
    top: 50%;
    margin-top: -8px;
  }

  .label {
    left: 47px;
    line-height: 36px;
  }

  &.sel {
    background-color: white;
    color: #AAA;
    text-decoration: line-through;
  }
}
</css>

h5. loading.rhtml (resources directory)

SproutCore apps can weigh in north of the welterweight class, so while the app is loading we may need to show
a loading indicator. For TodosThree we don't have to worry, but in larger apps, this file could need some
attention.

<html filename="apps/todos_three/resources/loading.rhtml">
<% content_for :loading do %>
<% # Any HTML in this file will be visible on screen while your page loads
   # its application JavaScript.  SproutCore applications are optimized for 
   # caching and startup very fast, so your users will often only see this 
   # content for a brief moment on their first app load, if at all.
%>
<p class="loading">Loading...<p>

<% end %>
</html>

NOTE: *GIT*: git commit -a -m 'Added resources files.'

h4. The Models Directory

*sproutcore gen* does not make a models directory, so we'll make it.

Move to the app root directory, make a models directory, and go there:

<shell>
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three
$ mkdir ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/models
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/models
</shell>

NOTE: SproutCore models are based on SC.Record, which offers a substantial set of data definition and
processing functionality.

The models directory will contain one file:

|_. todo.js |

h5. todo.js (models directory)

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/models/todo.js">
sc_require('core');

TodosThree.Todo = SC.Record.extend({
  timestamp: SC.Record.attr(SC.DateTime),
  isCompleted: SC.Record.attr(Boolean),
  title: SC.Record.attr(String)
});
</javascript>

The Todo model has three properties: timestamp, isCompleted, and title. All are defined using the
SC.Record.attr() helper (convenience) function, where builtin javascript types and Sproutcore types may be
specified. There is much more that could be done in these property definitions, but for TodosThree, the basic
types and their defaults will suffice.

Recall discussion of good habits regarding sc_require. The use of sc_require('core'); here is not
mandatory, but it is a good habit: TodosThree is defined in core.js.

NOTE: *GIT*: git add models & git commit -a -m 'Added models directory and todo model file.'

h4. The Controllers Directory

*sproutcore gen* does not make a controllers directory, so we'll make it.

Move to the TodosThree app root directory, make a controllers directory, and go there:

<shell>
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three
$ mkdir ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/controllers
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/controllers
</shell>

Controllers mediate communications. We'll need a couple in the TodosThree app.

The controllers directory will contain two files: 

|_. todos.js |_. completed_todos.js |

h5. todos.js (controllers directory)

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/controllers/todos.js">
sc_require('core');

TodosThree.todosController = SC.ArrayController.create({
});
</javascript>

h5. completed_todos.js (controllers directory)

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/controllers/completed_todos.js">
sc_require('controllers/todos');

TodosThree.completedTodosController = SC.ArrayController.create({

  totalTodosBinding: SC.Binding.oneWay('TodosThree.todosController.length'),

  areAllCompleted: function (k, v) {
    if (v !== undefined) {
      TodosThree.todosController.setEach('isCompleted', v);
    }
    return this.get('length') === this.get('totalTodos');
  }.property('length', 'totalTodos').cacheable()
});
</javascript>

The todosController has the simplest default definition as an SC.ArrayController. An array controller has a
default _content_ reference to the data: you don't see a content property defined here, but take note, because
you'll see prevalent use of the content property in most things controller.

The completedTodosController is another array controller. It has a property called totalTodosBinding, and a
function called areAllCompleted(). 

totalTodosBinding is simple enough. It is a one-way binding (we are "pulling", we don't care about pushing
back) to the length of the todosController array controller. We need a local reference to this length, because
we are about to do something impressive, in part based on it.

h6. *The areAllCompleted() Computed Property*

areAllCompleted() is a function, but that very special type of function, the computed property you have seen
in its simpler usage as a "getter." Here we are using a computed property as both a setter and a getter. You see
the .property() call hanging on the end of the function definition. This gives 'length' and 'totalTodos' as
dependencies for updating, then tacks on .cacheable(). We have a 'length' property available -- this is a
built-in property of an array controller. Quiz from something explained earlier: isn't the property called 
totalTodosBinding not totalTodos? Recall that the answer is that anytime Binding is seen at the end of a property
name, you have a kind of dual-property arrangement. The "actual" property is, in fact, totalTodos. In defining
totalTodosBinding, we essentially say to get the value of totalTodos from this other source. 

That covers the background on mechanics of property names and bindings. As before, here is a human language 
explanation of the chained calls on the end (.property('length', 'totalTodos').cacheable()):

"Base this computed property on the length and totalTodos properties, and update it if either of them changes,
and, also, cache the value so unnecessary updates are avoided." 

There is more to learn about the working of this computed property. What are the k and v parameters, and
what does the internal code do? k and v are key and value. On a call, if v is a defined value, then the
totalTodos value is being changed. This is a mandate to try to mark all todos as completed by this value. The
name of the computed property is _areAllCompleted_. If a call is made to set it, then the body of the
function needs to update the data accordingly. If v evaluates to true, then isCompleted for each todo item
will be set and all the checkboxes will be checked in the list. That explains what the if block does. 

Notice the return on the last line in areAllCompleted(). We return the result of a test comparing the length
of the array (the local 'length') to the length of the todos array (the local 'totalTodos', which is bound to
an external source, the full todosController array). If these lengths are the same, then all todos have been
marked as completed, otherwise no. 

NOTE: *GIT*: git add controllers & git commit -a -m 'Added controllers directory and controller files.'

h4. The Fixtures Directory

*sproutcore gen* does not make a fixtures directory. We'll make it.

Move to the TodosThree app root directory, make a fixtures directory, and go there:

<shell>
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three
$ mkdir ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/fixtures
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/fixtures
</shell>

The fixtures directory will contain one file: 

|_. todo.js |

h5. todo.js (fixtures directory)

<javascript filename="apps/todos_three/fixtures/todo.js">
sc_require('models/todo');

TodosThree.Todo.FIXTURES = [
 {
   guid: 0,
   isCompleted: YES,
   title: 'Add a SHOWING_APP state'
 },
 {
   guid: 1,
   isCompleted: YES,
   title: 'Edit the buildfile'
 },
 {
   guid: 2,
   isCompleted: YES,
   title: 'Add a TodosThree app'
 },
 {
   guid: 3,
   isCompleted: YES,
   title: 'Install SproutCore'
 }
];
</javascript>

NOTE: *GIT*: git add fixtures & git commit -a -m 'Added fixtures directory and fixture file.'

h3. Running the App

With all that work done (or if you downloaded the code or cloned it from git) we can run the app, which we
should do from the project root directory, where the project Buildfile lives:

<shell>
$ cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started
</shell>

And run it!

<shell>
$ sproutcore server
</shell>

Visit http://localhost:4020/ in your favorite modern browser and you should see a list of apps, including
TodosThree. 

h3. Where to Go from Here

There are several guides next that treat the build tools, core concepts, several additional pages about
views, including how to use the alternative system called templates (handlebars), models (records and
fixtures), theming, and testing.

INFO: The guides page called "Core View Concepts" is being updated to mesh better with the Getting Started
guides.

h3. Summary of the Getting Started Guides

The following steps are the from Getting Started: Parts 1, 2, and 3, this guide.

h5. Setting up the project

cd ~/development/sproutcore

*sproutcore gen project getting_started*

cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started

NOTE: git init & git add Buildfile & git add README & git commit -a -m 'First Commit. Added getting_started project with _sproutcore gen project getting_started_ command'

h5. Generating TodosOne

*sproutcore gen app TodosOne*

NOTE: git add apps & git commit -a -m 'Added TodosOne app with _sproutcore gen app TodosOne_ command'

h5. Generating TodosTwo

*sproutcore gen statechart_app TodosTwo*

NOTE: git add apps/todos_two & git commit -a -m 'Added TodosTwo app with _sproutcore gen statechart_app TodosTwo_ command'

h5. Generating TodosThree and Doing the Steps Above

*sproutcore gen statechart_app TodosThree*

NOTE: git add apps/todos_three & git commit -a -m 'Added TodosThree app with _sproutcore gen statechart_app TodosThree_ command'

cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started

* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/theme.js
* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/core.js
* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/main.js
* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/statechart.js

NOTE: git commit -a -m 'Edited files in the root app directory.'

cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/states

*renamed file: ready_state.js to ready.js*

* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/states/ready.js

NOTE: git commit -a -m 'Renamed ready_state.js file to ready.js. Edited to add controller content setting code.'

* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/states/logging_in.js
* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/states/showing_app.js
* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/states/showing_destroy_confirmation.js

NOTE: git commit -a -m 'Added additional states.'

cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/resources

* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/resources/main_page.js
* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/resources/todo_item.js
* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/resources/_theme.css
* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/resources/styles.css
* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/resources/loading.rhtml

NOTE: git commit -a -m 'Added resources files.'

cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three

* *made directory*: ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/models*

cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/models

* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/models/todo.js

NOTE: git add models & git commit -a -m 'Added models directory and todo model file.'

cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three

* *made directory*: ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/controllers*

cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/controllers

* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/controllers/todos.js
* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/controllers/completed_todos.js

NOTE: git add controllers & git commit -a -m 'Added controllers directory and controller files.'

cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three

* *made directory*: ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/fixtures*

cd ~/development/sproutcore/getting_started/apps/todos_three/fixtures

* *edited file*: apps/todos_three/fixtures/todo.js

NOTE: git add fixtures & git commit -a -m 'Added fixtures directory and fixture file.'

*All done!*

* March 1, 2011: initial version by "Tom Dale":credits.html#tomdale and "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats
* March 2, 2011: fixed formmating and added paths to filenames by "Topher Fangio":credits.html#topherfangio and "Peter Wagenet":credits.html#pwagenet
* March 22, 2011: cleaned up demo based on new features by "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats
* April 11, 2011: consistently use view classes and extend, update to reflect better Handlebars integration by "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats and "Tom Dale":credits.html#tomdale
* May 6, 2011: clarifications, minor inconsistency fixes, updated CSS for older browsers, plus new mobile section by "Tyler Keating":credits.html#publickeating
* May 9, 2011: update for recent changes in SproutCore 1.6 by "Tom Dale":credits.html#tomdale and "Yehuda Katz":credits.html#wycats
* March 6, 2012: rewrite for SproutCore 1.8 by the 1.8 release sprint team, including the following who did much work on this task: "Tim Evans":credits.html#tce, "Topher Fangio":credits.html#topherfangio, "Jeff Pittman":credits.html#geojeff

