h2. Install

This guide covers installing SproutCore. By referring to this guide you will be able to:

* Install a bundled version of SproutCore
* Install SproutCore as a Ruby Gem

endprologue.


h3. Getting Started

The easiest way to install the latest release of SproutCore is via "our website":http://www.sproutcore.com, where you can download a bundled version of the build tools and framework. One-click install packages are available for both Windows and Mac users. If you opt for this method, once you have your package downloaded and installed, you're ready to go! Skip forward to the "Testing Your Install":#testing-your-install section.

h3. Prerequisites for Command-Line Installation

You should already have Ruby 1.9 or later running on your system. If you need help installing Ruby please refer to the "RVM setup instructions":http://rvm.beginrescueend.com/

NOTE: SproutCore will also run on Ruby 1.8.7, although Ruby 1.9 is recommended.

h3. Installing via the Command-Line

To install the most recent stable release of SproutCore via the command-line, run the following command:

<shell>
$ gem install sproutcore
</shell>

Alternatively, if you want to use a pre-release version, install the Gem as follows:

<shell>
$ gem install --pre sproutcore
</shell>

The rest of these guides refer to SproutCore 1.5.

h3. Testing Your Install

To make sure that your system is configured correctly enter the following command:

<shell>
$ sproutcore help
</shell>

You should see output like this:

<shell>
Tasks:
  sproutcore build [TARGET..]                                                          ...
  sproutcore build-number TARGET                                                       ...
  sproutcore docs [TARGET..]                                                           ...
  sproutcore gen generator Namespace[.ClassName] [--target=TARGET_NAME] [--filename=FIL...
  sproutcore help [TASK]                                                               ...
  sproutcore init PROJECT [APP]                                                        ...
  sproutcore manifest [TARGET..]                                                       ...
  sproutcore server                                                                    ...

Options:
      [--project=PROJECT]              
      [--mode=MODE]                    
      [--logfile=LOGFILE]              
      [--build=BUILD]                  
      [--build-targets=BUILD-TARGETS]  
      [--yui-minification]             
      [--dont-minify]                  
  -v, [--verbose]                      
  -V, [--very-verbose]                 
      [--library=LIBRARY]              
      [--environment=ENVIRONMENT]      
</shell>

<construction>
h3. Next Steps

Great, you're good to go. You'll probably want to continue with the "Getting Started":getting_started.html guide.
</construction>

h3. Changelog

* February 1, 2011: first pass at the user install docs by "Shawn Morel":credits.html#shawnmorel
* April 26, 2011: Updating gem instructions to start with stable 1.5, by Parker Morse
* May 5, 2011: Updated to include instructions on bundled install and general cleanup, by "Colin Campbell":credits.html#colin
